imagine you gave your house and all
of your assets everything you own
to some rich guy and then you took a massive loan
from him and you gave the money back to him so
now you're in debt to him he owns everything how
can you not be poor and the answer is: you can't!
all right so today we're going to do a nice
educational one uh topical about the main issues
which people are worried about today that we get
asked about a lot which are inflation, interestrates
and house prices often viewed I think as
3 separate concerns but they're very very
linked they're very related so I think if we cover
all 3 of these and the way they're related it
can really help people to understand how the
economy works and what's happening now right
so we're going to start with inflation so the
first thing is we've covered this before but I'll
go over it quickly I believe and I've said this
many times on the channel, that the inflation was
largely caused by the enormous amount of money
given out by this government and governments
all over the world during Covid uh the amounts
are truly enormous £700billion in this country(UK)
which is 14,000 pounds per adult, eight trillion
dollars in the US which is about 30,000 dollars
per adult huge amounts of money given outthat
amount of money has to end up somewhere ends
up in the bank accounts of private individuals
largely wealthier private individuals which means
huge huge, nobody is denying this by the way this
is generally accepted, enormous accumulation of
cash by richer individuals in the last three
years during Covid which is the reason why
I said in the first video on this channel thatwhen
we come out of Covid we will probably see a
big jump in inflation because there would have
been this massive cash accumulation with rich
individuals okay um that has not generally
been the mainstream media explanation of
inflation and they've been generally saying
it's because of sort of an anonymous after
effects of covid which never really explained
in much detail and of course the Ukraine war
I'm not denying that the war in Ukraine has caused
inflation especially with specifically with energy
that is a part of it as well but I think a big
part of it is this massive cash accumulation
during Covid if you give a huge amount of cash
out what you essentially do is you devalue the
currency because most people especially the
rich have huge amount more money, more money
going around, they can buy more things, they
can push prices up, prices go up and you know
we predicted it in advance and it happened! what
doesthat mean going forward okay so if I'm right and
it was largely caused by this huge amount of money
given out by the government you would expect a
kind of relatively sharp jump in prices and then
for prices to start going up much more slowly
because the government gave a huge amount of money
out in a short period of time and now they are still
running a deficit higher than pre-covid andthat
is because basically there's been a massive
increase in poverty since covid because of the
inflation which means the government is now forced
to for example subsidise people's energy which has
cost the government, they're forced to provide more
poverty benefits because people are struggling
so the government gave a huge amount of money
out and now they have to keep giving money up at a
much slower rate so what I would expect to happen
is a big increase in prices and then for prices
to keep going up but not at this rapid rate so
we've seen the big increase and what I expect
happen now is that prices will will slow down
they will keep going up because the
government is still giving money out
but they will not keep going up at the rapid
rate so we will see a big fall in inflation
um almost certainly it's important that people
understand that a fall in inflation does not
mean a fall in prices right, inflation
is the rate of increase in prices so
prices jumped a lot they will keep going
up but that will slow down massively
um inflation will probably fall to something
like six seven percent maybe even lower this
year that is just simply because the
government is not giving so much money
out the government will try and take credit
for that but it's important to remember that
if prices are still going up six seven percent a
year then you know life is still getting harder
life is still getting worse for you and the
fall in inflation is really a fall in the rate
of decrease of your living standards it's notreally
something for the government to be proudof
okay so that's inflation covered for now
inflation will probably normalise right
I think it's because of the huge amount ofmoney
given out that that rich people still have, um
other people think it's because of otherthings
um let's move on to interest rates so
interest rates have risen significantly herein the
UK they're up to four and a quarter now(4.25%)
financial markets... first thing to say is financial
markets think that we are nearing the top now they
think that interest rates will probably peak at
something like four and a half maybe four and
three quarters (4.5-4.75%) which means another
just 1 or2 increases in interest rates this yearum
I suspect that'll probably be right in the shortterm
& then interest rates will start to slowly comedown
now there's been a lot of discussion about
interest rates and I want to talk about this one
because I think I think the situation is quite
interesting right there's been a lot of criticism
especially from the left, people saying what the
hell is the Bank of England doing raising interest
rates um and that's understandable because when
the bank raises interest rates your mortgage rate
goes up I think a lot of people are seeing massive
increase in their mortgage rates it's causing a
lot of problems um it increases the interestthat
the government has to pay on it's governmentdebt
government debt is massively increased in
the last three years it's very large it's about
100% of GDP I think it's you know something like
30,000 pounds per person it's a lot um they
have to pay a higher interest rate, if youhave a
mortgage you have to pay a higher interest rate
um and people are understandably super stressed
about that right and they're turning around to the
Bank of England and they're saying 'well why are
you doing this? because you're hurting us you're
hurting us you're hurting the economy' and I think
this provides opportunity for a really interesting
discussion so the first thing to say is from
my perspective the inflation has been caused
by the government giving money out that has
ended up with rich people and we discussed this
exactly in the first video on the channel where
we predicted the inflation right where we said
if during covid the government is going
to give 700 billion pounds to the rich
the only way to avoid a crisis in
inflation and inequality because
that cash distribution increases both of those
things, is to take money back from the rich
through taxation policy you see that's
symmetrical if I give you money then the way
to reverse that and avoid the consequences
of that are to then tax money from you okay
but that's not what we're doing right what
we're doing is the government has given money
out which has ended up with the rich and then
rather than taxing money back from the rich
the Central Bank the Bank of England is increasing
interest rates and this is because economistswhen
they think of inflation they always think ofinterest
rates this is what happens in economistsminds
if inflation is too high raise interestrates
if inflation is too low lower interest rates
these are like the articles of faith of being an
economist they're really connected and they
tend not to think in terms of fiscal policy
so in economists minds they have these these
ideas of two levers that rule the economy one is
fiscal policy and that is government taxation and
expenditure so during covid the government run
a massive deficit that means they spent way more
than they taxed, that is what they would call a
fiscal stimulus, it's pouring money in in terms
of government spending that's fiscal policy
monetary policies is basically Central Bank
interest rates it includes quantitative easing
which we've covered before but I think to keep
things simple let's just talk about interest
rates and that is you lower the interest rate
to speed the economy up, you raise the
interest rate to speed the economy down
it's important to recognise that these are two
different things all right and both of them
can affect inflation so if the government starts
spending a ton of money and during Covid most of
it's printed money that will push inflation up and
if the Central Bank starts slashing interest rates
that will also push inflation up but they're
different things right and I think the most
important thing to understand if you take anything
away from this video is that we are clearly using
the wrong policy to fix the inflation because if
we cause the inflation by giving money to the rich
then the way to fix it is to take money from the
rich, if we try to fix it by raising interest rates
what does that mean well interest rates
are the money that is paid by borrowers
in the economy to lenders in the economy and
I remember we've covered this on the channel
before that for every borrower there is a lender
for every lender there is a borrower okay it's
always perfectly matched you can't borrow money
from nobody, you can't owe money to nobody okay
so really when the Central Bank raises interest
rates what they are doing is they are benefiting
the lenders, so who are lenders? lenders are people
with large amounts of money who lend money out
you know largely it's wealthy individuals you know
sometimes it goes through your bank so if you
have a huge amount of cash in the bank, your bank
lends that money to government, your bank lends
that money to mortgage borrowers, if you have a lot
of money in your pension, your pension fund lends
that money to the government, lends that money
to mortgage borrowers right so people with large
amounts of cash benefit when interest rates go up
and the people who lose are people who have large
amounts of borrowing which is the government first
and foremost and people with mortgages people
with large mortgages which is largely younger
homeowners & also it doesn't include homeowners
from rich families who don't have to use
mortgages right so when you raise interest rates
often you are benefiting rich people because
they have a lot of cash and your disadvantaging
the government and mortgagees; people who have
mortgages, that is increasing inequality and it's
not as simple as that right because there are
some poorer people have all of their money in
cash you may feel that they benefit there might
be some rich people have a large amount of debt
for example I have a large amount of debt as part
of my sort of trading portfolio but in general
when you raise interest rates you're moving money
from borrowers which is mortgage holdersand
the government, to lenders which is rich
individuals especially older rich individuals so
when the government has given money
out it's caused two things to happen
1. a massive increase in inequality & 2.a decrease
in the value of the currency which we see as inflation
if it wanted to perfectlyoffset that then it would tax
the rich back butfor some reason, which as you know
i'm constantly maddened about, taxing the rich has never
reallybeen seriously in the discussion here even though
we've seen a massive increase in the wealth of the
rich, so instead we've gone for the default whichis
raising interest rates now raising interestrates
does increase the value of the currency so
the one half of it which is the devaluation ofthe
currency you are fighting by raising interest rates
but the other half which was an increase in
inequality, raising interest rates makes thatworse
right because you're forcing borrowerswho are
often not wealthy families, if you'rewealthyyou
wouldn't take a mortgage and thegovernment
which means the taxpayer which means
ordinary working people because as weknow
the very wealthy don't pay high rates of tax
the taxpayer and mortgage holders have to pay more
money to the cash holders which are the people who've
accumulated huge amounts of cash during Covid,
which isthe rich, so in trying to fix with monetary policy
by the bank of England a problem which was caused
the fiscal or taxation policy by the government
you've ended up trying to fix a crisis
of inequality by more inequality so that
that means that the long run situation for the
economy and for for inequality is extremely bad
but it will succeed eventually in bringing
inflation down and this I think is
there'll be people who there will be some people
who won't like me saying this it will be unpopular
with some there's been a lot of criticism from
the left of the central bank for their interest
rate policy they're saying you know why are
you raising interest rates it's hurting people
if the bank of England kept interest rates at
zero the pound would have collapsed in currency
markets the pound would be worth half of what
it is now we'd be seeing an inflation crisis and
I mean it would be very similar to what happened
after the trussonomics disaster in Autumn so
I think people who are pointing at the Bankof
England (BoE) and saying this is your fault
listen I've got no love lost forthe
Bank of England or Andrew Bailey
um I think that they have no choice but todo
this, the problem is because the government
and the broader economics discussion in the
mediahave said nothing about taxing the rich
which would be the correct way to fix it, the Central
Bank has no option but to raise the interest rates
you know if we I think an interesting thought
experiment is to sit and think what if we reversed
the cash distributions of the last three years
what if we went to every single person in the top
10% of the country and said we want £140,000 tax
that would be a reversal like that it seems crazy
but that is what we have done in the last 3
years we've distributed £140,000 to the richest
5 million people in the country each person
right so if we took that back you would see
a collapse in inflation a massive collapses these
people desperately tried to raise that cash right
so the interest rates had to go up because we have
refused to have the discussion about taxing the
rich and if you give a ton of money to the rich
inflation will increase if you refuse to take the
money back the only option central banks have
to try and keep inflation is to raise interestrates
and it will happen but in terms of looking
forward I believe that the inflation will come
down when it safely quickly which means that the
central banks including the Bank of England,
the Fed, the European Central Bank (ECB) will stop
raisingrates relatively soon um I think that once that
inflation slows down you will start to see how
severe the economic weakness is underneath how
big the increase in poverty is and you'll probably
start seeing in my opinion interest rates start
to fall relatively quickly but that that depends
on whether there's a bit of a balance here right
because because we've seen such a big increase in
poverty it creates creates pressure on governments
to do more deficit spending and pump more money in
& if governments are forced to pump more moneyin
that could keep inflation higher over the long
term and I think what you're seeing here is kind
of the death throws of an economy which has given
up on tax taxing the rich so if you cannot tax the
rich and the rich have all the assets then you end
up in a situation where whenever there's a crisis
the rich get a ton of money and you can't get
it back so the only option you have is to raise
interest rates and that causes more poverty which
means you have to give more money to the rich
it's a question basically you're trying to solve
the question of how do you prevent poverty when
you are giving all of the assets to a group
of people that you can get nothing back from
it's almost a question of imagine you gave your
house and all of your assets everything you own
to some rich guy and then you took a massive
loan from him and you gave the money back to
him so now you're in debt to him he owns
everything how can you not be poor and the
answer is you can't so if you keep trying to
provide living standards without the ability
to tax the people who increasingly own everything
it's not possible so you will continue to see
this Balancing Act between the government has to
spend a deficit which keeps inflation High but I
think what you will see in this country I think
the conservative government has a big political
problem with high interest rates and that takes
us to our next point which is house prices so
how do you buy a house in a world where
you're poor and the rich have everything
the answer is you borrow the money from the
rich and that that's mortgages and mortgages
have been the way that we have squared this
circle for the last 20 years in this country
which is the conservative government has quite a
political need for people to own property because
private renters and social renters
almost never vote conservative
um they need house prices to rise because
that's the only reason that older people feel
comfortable because the house prices are rising
so they need to keep people owning property
but inequality is rising and rising, the middle
class are losing their assets so how do we keep
ordinary people owning property when inequality is
rising because rising inequality of wealth means
you lose your assets but we need you to lose your
assets but keep your house how is that possible
the answer is increasing debt so you can keep your
house and you can just get more and more and more
and more in debt to the rich that way you stay a
property owner so you keep voting conservative but
you become poorer and poorer generation after
generation so it's really mortgages and debt
I like the magic solution that works for the
government and that has been working for them
for the last 15 years quite well politically
because the rich get richer and richer because
you owe them more and more and more money but you
keep your house so everybody's winning the rich
get richer you get poorer but you keep voting for
them because you're a homeowner and what you want
is for asset prices to go up it's really really
good for the conservatives and it's really bad for
people in general and this is why higher interest
rates are a disaster for the conservatives because
they need ordinary people to be taking huge
amounts of debt and huge amounts of debt are
not affordable for ordinary people at interest
rates of six seven eight percent which is what
a lot of mortgage rates have gone up to right
so they need interest rates to come down they
need interest rates to come down desperately so
I think what they will do and what you're seeing
them doing is they will try their best to run asmuch
as possible an extreme austerity government
in the next year and a half in a desperate
attempt to bring inflation down quickly
so that interest rates come down and as soon as
interest rates come down you will start to see
those house prices go up because of the thing we
mentioned at the beginning of the video which is
that 700 billion pounds which has been given out
by the government the last three years is still
sitting in the bank accounts of the rich and this
is the big conflict we have right the rich have
all that money and what would the rich people
do with money they want to buy assets so house
prices want to go up but rich people themselves
don't want to go out and buy a ton of houses right
because buying houses is a hassle you know you
need to manage tenants, super rich people don't
want to be having to fix poor people's boilers things
like this they don't want to be involved in stuff
like that so what they normally do is they lend
the money out they lend the money out but suddenly
poor people can't afford to borrow the money
anymore so it's created this it's created this
two forces in house prices which is on the
one hand house prices should be going up
because the rich have got a ton of money and
it'simportant to be clear house prices have
gone upby about 20% since the beginning of
Covid, and nowthey've come down about 3-4%
so that force of the rich having a ton of money
push house prices up but now the mechanism by
which rich people buy houses and I think
this is an interesting thing to consider
mortgages are in a very real way
the way that rich people buy houses
so I've got half a million pounds and
you've got nothing and you want a house
there's two ways I can give you housing I can
buy the house myself and I can rent it to you
or I can lend you the half a million pounds you
can buy the house and instead of paying rent you
pay me Interest financially it's very similar
if you think about it in both cases I provide
all of the money for the house to be bought and
in one case you pay me rent and other case you
pay me interest so really mortgages are the way
that the rich buy houses for the poor but that
channel has become blocked because the poor can
nolonger afford the interest um so I think there are
two things that can possibly happen here and the
way it will play out will depend on the country
one is in this country I think the government
will do everything they can to bring inflation
down but that will come at the cost of really
crushing the economy and crushing ordinary people
um I think the way they'll hope to survive that
is by making a bit of room to like throw a load
of money immediately before the election they
will try to bring the interest rates down and
as soon as interest rates come down then you will
see this flood of money that the rich have again
they continue to push house prices up even though
they've already gone up 20% I think they can go up
a lot more if you look at after 2008 houseprices
basically doubled over the next 10-15years
and I think they can do that again so ifthe
interest rates come down then this channel
will open up again the interesting question
is what if interest rates don't come down
which is what could happen if governments
are forced to keep running big deficits
in that case you'll have the question of how
do the rich people buy their houses when they
can't lend the money out and I think what you
will see if that happens is the rich will start
buying the houses through corporations and you
will start to see much more corporate landlording
so I lived in Japan for a long time and I
think increasingly in the US you're seeing
rather than the rich lending the pool of money
via mortgages the rich pull their money together
into corporations so there's I think it's is
it BlackRock or is it Blackstone in the U.S
it's a massive company which owns a huge amount
ofhousing, rich people pool their money together
in corporations the corporations buy the houses
and the corporations lend the money out because
it's quite interesting at the moment you're
seeing rents go through the roof at the same
time as house prices go down and the rich are
sitting on a huge pile of cash so it's a it's
a massive investment opportunity for wealthy
people with cash because rents are super high
and they've got a ton of money and the prices are
cheap so the rich should be buying these houses
and bringing the rent in but the problem simply
is rich people are you know too lazy to go
and buy 10 houses right and it's becoming more
it's it's cumbersome right rich people don't
want to be becoming massive buy-to-let landlords
right so but either way the money is there
and that will force house prices up in the long term
and I think what you're just seeing is the the
mortgage channel get blocked in the meantime um
but what you would inevitably see in any case is
the massive gift of cash to the rich will manifest
in increased inequality of real assets
either through much higher mortgages which means a
much higher amount of debt from ordinary families
to the rich, we've already seen a much higher debt
from the government to the rich and what you will
see is increased direct holding of properties
I think it's important to realise when that
mortgage channel gets blocked it provides a massive
opportunity for rich people who can just pay cash
they don't need a mortgage they can just buy cash
at the cheaper price get in that massive increase in
rental income rents are going absolutely through
the roof and they can profit from thatso every
single step of the way, Covid management
meaning massive cash transfer from the
government to the rich, higher interest ratesmeaning
higher debt payments from mortgagees and the
government to the rich and falling house prices
at the same time as high mortgage rates means
cheaper access to housing if you have the cash,
which only rich people do, every single step of
the way is benefiting the rich and hurting ordinary
middle class families and there's nothingthat
will prevent this if we don't startdiscussing
more seriously taxation of the rich
so to make clear the predictions
you know inflation will come down
um it will still be positive for a while
interest rates will stop going up and I
think they'll probably start coming down
it might take a year or two um house prices
they're clearly falling at the moment even though
they're still significantly higher than pre-covid
I don't think that will last I think as soon as
interest rates start falling they will start
going up and even if they don't you'll juststart
seeing more more Corporate Land lording
& I know these are pessimistic predictions uh
we get a lot of people saying that these are
pessimistic predictions but this is what happens
if you don't text the rich and if you don't want
bad outcomes you cannot allow inequality to
get higher and higher so support the channel
we're always pushing for higher taxation of the
richest and that's you know that's the onlyway
we're going to prevent these things I know
that these are not good for ordinary families
we can't fix it without without improving
taxation policy so let's do that okay thats all